Welcome back.
My name is David Bumble s.c.i.
Eleven thousand twenty three.
And in this section we're going look at IP version 6.
We have been talking about the transition to Activision six for many years in the networking industry
that it looks like we finally run out of time.
It looks like this is the final year 2011 of being able to delay the transition to IPV six in production
in real world environments.
It's expected that in 2011 we will finally run out of IP version 4 addresses and be forced to move to
IP version 6.
So it looks like we can no longer procrastinate the conversion of our networks to IP version 6 but start
with this news item from the BBC.
Now it is dated 28 of January 2011.
Were they talking about the last big blocks of the Nates dwindling stock of addresses about to be handed
out.
They are talking about total exhaustion in September 2011 however notice what the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers is stating on the Web site last IPV for dresses are allocated today.
And I mean you can read more about it on the web site but notice they say that today is a historic milestone
for the Internet with the last addresses have been allocated.
So after years of rapid Internet expansion the pool of available unallocated addresses for IP version
4 is completely depleted.
Notice the news release February 3 2011 available pool of unallocated provision for Internet addresses
is now completely emptied.
They talk about a critical point in history was reached today with the allocation of the last remaining
IP version of four addresses from a central pool.
So this is a major turning point in the ongoing development of the Internet.
So notice here two blocks of the dwindling provision for addresses.
About 33 million of them were allocated earlier this week to the Asia Pacific region.
When that happened it meant the pool of IPV for dresser's had been depleted to a point where global
policy was triggered to immediately allocate the remaining small pool of addresses equally among the
five global regional Internet registries.
This has now taken place so they are located in a ceremony in Miami so the procrastination for the convergence
to IP version 6 is now finally over.
We have to make sure we know how IP version 6 works and functions because we're going to come across
it a lot more in the coming months and years.
So what we're going to cover is firstly looking at the need for IP version 6.
And I think I've covered that already.
We have run out of IP version 4 addresses and we are now forced to convert or migrate to AGI version
6.
Mean explain the format of an IP version 6 address an IP version 6 addresses 128 bits in length.
So a lot larger than the city to that IP version for address that we used to working with.
We can look at the methods of assigning an IP version 6 address.
We can look at routing protocols.
We're going to look at implementation strategies.
And I'd like to show you in the configuration.
So in other words I'll get a little network running using IP version 6 with G.
The thing that seems to escape people most is the format of an IP version 6 address.
The great thing about Activision 6 you can take a lot of your knowledge of IP version 4 and just apply
it in an IP version 6 environment routing protocols like OSPF rip GOP and so forth are available in
IP version 6.
The version in the syntax text might be slightly different but a lot of the concepts remain the same.
We still have TCAP and UDP and a lot of the other protocols.
So you don't have to learn everything from scratch which is a great benefit in Activision for an address
consists of four tests which equals 32 bits in binary.
So this is what an IP version for address would look like in binary or in Dr decimal notation.
This is the number of IP addresses available in IP version for now an IP version 6.
The address is 16 octets in length which equates to 128 bits.
This is an IP version 6 address written in binary.
And as you can see it's a lot lot longer IP version 6 addresses are typically written in hexadecimal.
So this is the hex representation of this binary IPV 6 address.
They are 3.4 times ten to the thirty eight IP addresses available.
The pool is a much much larger.
The industry is learning from the mistakes of the past.
And in this case they're making the pool very large so that we don't run into the same issue in a few
years time where we run out of IP version 6 addresses.
It's a dangerous thing to say this but this should be enough addresses for future Internet growth requirements.
But just to put this in perspective there are enough IP version 6 addresses that we could allocate the
entire equivalent IPV for Internet address space to every individual on Earth.
That's how big this address space is.
When comparing the time model of IP version 4 to IP version 6 you'll notice that all the layers except
for Layer 3 have remained the same or only had slight modifications.
So the application presentation session and transport will function in IP version 6 in the same way
as they function in IP version for the network layer is where the changes have been made.
For instance an IP version of fortress consists of only 32 bits but an IPV 6 address consists of 128
bits.
The data link layer and physical layer Orser remain the same.
So from a networking point of view this is great news because you can take all your knowledge and experience
of IP version 4 protocols and apply it in an IP version 6 environment.
It's not like in other rodded protocols we have to learn an entire new protocol stack protocols like
TZP and UDP still remain at Layer 4 and reside on top of IPV 6 just like they do an IP version 4.
So let's look at the IP V-6 address format in more detail.
It consists of eight Xs where X is 16 but takes it a small field separated by colons.
So it would look something like this.
Please note that an IP V-6 address is case insensitive.
So you could write F in lowercase and be in uppercase and it wouldn't make any difference.
It's not case sensitive.
There are some rules that you need to remember leading zeros or optional within the 16 but takes a decimal
field and successive fields of zeros can be represented as Colon colon but only once address.
So as an example you could take this address and rewrite it as the following notice these two octets
could be written as a Zira and notice these four states here.
So the eight zeros in hexadecimal can be represented as Colon colon.
However you cannot put colon colon twice with in an IP address because the system would have no way
of working out how many zeros are represented by these colons.
Is this four zeros and those eight zeros.
Or is this eight zeros and there's four zeros.
So you can only put colon colon once in a mid-race OK.
Here's another example.
We have an IP version 6 address written as follows.
Correct representations of this address would be as follows.
Two thousand and one remains the same.
This leadings zero can be removed.
So we have one two three these four zeros and these four zeros can be condensed down to only colon colon.
So those eight zeros can be compressed down to colon colon.
The 4 x for remain the same.
Now you also have four zeros followed by four zeros.
However you can only represent a string of zeros by colon colon once in an address.
And you've already done that.
So what you can do is remove the leading zeros and when you remove leading zeros you have to have one
value that remains between the colon.
So notice here we've removed three leading zeros.
And here we've removed three leading zeros.
Yeah we've removed the leading zero in front of ABC so that 0 is also being removed.
So this is a correct representation of the address.
Or you could do something similar way these eight zeros are represented by Colon's era column 0.
But these eight zeros are represented by colon colon.
Remember you can only have two colons written in this format once in an address.
So this would be an incorrect format for an IP V-6 address.
A rat will not except you typing this address on an interface as it cannot work out how many zeroes
are between these two columns and how many zeros are between these two colons.
You can only write code on code on once in an address.
So here are some more examples in this IP V-6 address we have.
If it's 0 1 followed by a bunch of zeros ending in a 1 so we could represent that address by us or by
this or by this.
And I'm sure you can think of other variations of this address.
Please note this is the same address.
It's like saying tomato juice is tomato or napkin versus serviette.
It's the same thing just represented in different formats.
Here's another example.
We've got four ones followed by 2:59 for all about eight zeros followed by one two three four followed
by eight zeros followed by four ones.
These four zeros can be condensed down to zero.
And these eight zeros can be condensed down to Colon Cullen or you can say those eight zeros are represented
by colon colon and these four zeros by a zero.
And those four zeros by zero.
Once again it's the same address different representations whichever you prefer.
Once again this address a bunch of zeros followed by one could be represented as Colon colon one.
This is the loopback address of an interface and a string of zeros could be represented as Colon colon.
This is an example of an unassigned address cómo on a Windows machine occupying 127 0 0 1 the loopback
in IP version 4.
By the same token I can think colon colon one which is the loopback in IP version 6.
If you remember the design is an IP version 4.
Unfortunately chose a class A address for the loopback address and thus the IP version for address range
lost 16 million host addresses because the loopback is across a address in PV 6.
The design is of try to avoid the same mistakes that were made in the past.
So notice the loopback address is just called on call on one.
But I could also taking
which is the same address the loopback.
All I could do the following
or something like this.
Notice it's all the same address my PC automatically converts it into call on column 1 which I think
is the easiest representation of this address now in the real world this is going to be a lot of fun.
It's difficult enough trying to get users to top HTP cold encored slash forward slash and IP version
4 address into a web browser.
Can you imagine trying to get them to do the following in IP version 6 in a web browser you have to
enclose the address within square brackets as follows.
So in other words you would type HTP colon slash slash.
The IP version 6 address colon.
And then for instance the port number to ADHD.
And then for instance a file name let's say indexed at age Chmela.
This is obviously going to be very difficult for users.
So I suppose you would use this mostly for diagnostic purposes but I can see that we're going to have
to ask users to do this at some point.
So good luck with that.
So it's recommended to use fully qualified domain names rather than IP addresses.
So rather than typing something like this you would say Cisco dot com and then rely on DNS to do the
conversion.
Now to your IP version 6 connectivity you can go to this Web site HTP Portes flashforwards Lesch test
IPV six dot com and this will run a series of tests to check your connectivity to IP version 6 as you
can see.
I'm going to have a problem where I'm currently residing is also information about VB 6 day which depending
on when you're viewing this may have taken place already.
It's scheduled for eight of June 2011 when there's going to be a global scale test flight of IP version
6.
So major web companies and other industry players will enable IP version 6 on their main Web sites for
24 hours of the different types of addresses in occupations six some of which you'll recognize already.
The first one is a unique cost address which has an address allocated to single interface for example
and several types of unicast addresses and I'll go through all of these in more detail in upcoming slides.
But first we have a global unique cost race.
There is no need for net in IP version 6.
That comes as a big shock to a lot of people.
Remember that was introduced to try and conserve ATI version for addresses yet we have plenty of addresses
so there's no need for net a lot of people say that that's a security vulnerability.
But remember that net will network address translation was not developed for security originally.
That's a byproduct of net that we have globally unique unique cost addresses.
The address on your interface on your PC at home will be unique globally.
There is no need for your IP address to be netted to an external or public address or a public if you
like global Unicode addresses available for all devices in the world.
There are also reserved unicast of racism we won't worry too much about them.
We also have link local unicast addresses and I only refer to a particular physical link.
Raptor's do not forward link local addresses linked local addresses will allow two hosts to communicate
with each other without IP addresses being assigned to those devices.
So two users could connect that PCs back to back using for instance a crossover cable and they'll have
immediate optic connectivity without the need for manual configuration of addresses or for the HGP server.
Many ITV six routing protocols also use Linked local addresses to communicate with each other link local
addresses are also used for Link communication such as automatic address configuration neighbor discovery
and rodded discovery.
I'll show you a link local address looks like in a moment.
We also have site local unicast addresses which are similar in concept to RAFC 19:18 private addresses.
These are addresses assigned to an entire site within an organization so site local address would only
be valid within the site makework of an organization so that local addresses were part of the original
addressing architecture from 1995.
Please note that site local unicast addresses have been deprecated since September 2004.
And you can read more about this in RAFC 3 8 7 9 where they talk about deprecating site local addresses.
It's important to note that the development of IP B-6 has been ongoing for a number of years and certain
terms that you come across such a site local addresses will have changed or been updated.
In this case deprecated.
So they no longer use because of the confusion and ambiguity of the term site.
They have not been replaced with what are called unique local addresses.
There are also some special purpose unicast addresses such as unspecified whichever it is shown you
it's just colon colon and is used to refer to the host itself and is used when a device does not know
its own IP address.
This will be typically used in the source field of a datagram that is sent by a device that seeks to
have its IP address configured.
So colon colon means unspecified.
I've already demonstrated loopback.
That would be colon colon one which is very similar to 1:27 001 for example.
Now IP version for compatible addresses have also been deprecated.
It would allow for the representation of an IP version for address with an IP version 6.
The most significant 96 bits of the address would be set to zero while the last 32 bits are the IP version
for address that is represented.
This was deprecated in 2006.
The reason I still mention these addresses is that you may come across them an IP version 6 or literature.
Just be aware like a lot of things and life changes have taken place and certain technologies and addresses
have been cropped or deprecated.
So be aware the first top addressing not Division 6 is unicast.
The second is multicast where one host speech to many hosts.
And this is very similar to multicasting and provision for because it enables more efficient use of
the network but uses a larger address range.
The advantage of multicasting is that a single stream from a single server can go to many many devices
so a hundred devices could be receiving the same video stream of one megabits per second rather than
having a hundred one megabits per second streams and thus using up a hundred megabits per second.
If the cost was used the third type is any cost.
Now this does exist in IP version 4 as well.
This is known as one to nearest Unix addresses are used but the same address is configured on two or
more devices.
The idea here is that routers will decide on the closest device to reach the destination.
If you are going to Amazon Dot com for example you wouldn't care if that server was hosted in California
or in New York.
You just want to purchase a book for example from Amazon.
If you on the West Coast of the US you would be closer to a server in California than you would be to
a server in New York.
So at any cost to servers one in New York one in San Francisco for example are configured with the same
IP address.
If you are on the West Coast of the US and you are going to Amazon Dot com for example you'd be routed
to the server in San Francisco because it's physically closer to you than the server in New York.
By the same token if you're on the east coast you'd be routed to the server in New York.
It allows for load balancing and content delivery services.
As I've mentioned it already exists an IP version 4.
So they are three address types Naki version 6.
So we have broad costs which are so common in IP version for broadcast addresses no longer exist.
Broadcasts can cause lots of issues on networks and broadcasting has been replaced with multicasting
in an IP version 6 environment.
We no longer send broadcasts if we want to contact multiple devices.
We send a multicast instead of a broadcast as mentioned an IP version 6 address is 120 a.
But since lenth it consists of two main portions we have the network portion when they took prefix and
the interface identifier or host portion.
Each of these is 64 bits in length.
Now it may come as a surprise to you but there's no submitting an IP version 6 like an IP version 4.
We're not going to subnet is say a slash city or slashed 28 or slash 16.
We're not going to have classes of addresses like class A B and C and subnets of those like taking a
class C address and submitting it to slash 28 or slash 30.
That no longer exists.
The following statement is important to understand every interface has a mosque slash 64 in your enterprise
environments.
Every interface when using a Unicode address has a mosque of 64.
I'll say that again all interfaces have a subnet mask of slash 64.
In other words the network prefix is always slash 64.
In our enterprise environments the host portion is always 64 bits.
So this actually makes our lives a lot easier because we don't have to do crazy subsetting in IP version
6 in a similar way.
We had to do an IP version 4.
So there's no subsetting like an IP version 4.
There's also no net like an IP version 4.
NET is no longer required addresses and organizations use what are called aggregated all global unicast
addresses.
Which is quite a mouthful.
I'll just refer to these as global unicast addresses but the full name once again is aggregated all
global unicast addresses.
In other words addresses within your organization of globally unique.
There is no need to net those addresses when going onto the Internet because they all like public IP
addresses within organizations they are globally unique there are also a unique cost addresses.
The term aggregate A-ball means that they can be aggregated or summarized in the global Internet.
The design is of IP version 6.
I've specifically looked at aggregation of addresses to reduce writing table sizes within the global
Internet and I'll show you an example of that in a moment.
Each Malenko interface will have a slash 64 subnet mask.
Once again this makes life a lot easier.
The interface identifier or ID which is 64 bits in length can use a modified EU I-64 format address
which I'll explain in a moment.
But it's essentially a modified mac address.
For those of you who've been in networking for a long time you may remember how IPX to use the Mac address
and that same thinking can be used in IP version 6.
So the EU address allows us to get the interface ID portion of an IP version 6 address.
This can be used in multiple IP version 6 addresses including link local site local as well as the stateless
order configuration mechanism.
Don't worry too much about those.
Now we'll be talking about them in a moment but please note and address can also be used in an aggregate
of all global unicast address.
It doesn't have to be but you can use it if you so desire.
And you just said that with a command on a Cisco router.
So what happens is the Rotto other device takes its ethernet MAC address which is 48 bits in length
and he has an example of an Ethernet MAC address and the address is split in half between the vendor
portion and the unique portion of the MAC address.
If as if he is inserted in the middle which results in a 64 bit address remember all of these values
on hexadecimal.
So this represents 64 bits.
So again please note that this address is written in hexadecimal because IP version 6 addresses are
written in hexadecimal.
These two hexadecimal values equate to 8 binary bits.